We're in the conference room at the University of
Texas at Arlington. I'm interviewing Art
Anjumani, one of the faculty members here in the
department. Art, could you please clarify for me
the two entities you have here in the department?
the urban studies and then the city and regional
planning. OK. We have here Institute of Urban
Studies. That is an institute mandated by the
state of Texas. and acting as sort of school. And
the city and regional planning program is, in some
senses, like a division inside this sort of school
that we have. So the Institute of Urban Studies is
the umbrella organization. Inside this
organization, there is a three-degree granting
division or department or whatever you are
calling that. And there is also other divisions,
such as research and training, et cetera. All
these are inside the Institute of Urban Studies.
City and regional planning is a sort of
department, as I said, and supposedly should have
been called department. But the university, a
couple of years ago, has decided that They are not
going to go with separate budget lines for the
professional schools. And they considered the
institute and we inside them as professional
schools, such as architecture, et cetera. And
they only gave one budget line to each one of these
schools. So the whole institute right now has only
one budget line. And because of that, we cannot
have separate departments inside such schools,
such as Institute of Urban Studies. Therefore,
that's why we call City Energy on the Planet as a
program. And we have other degree granting, which
is urban and regional affairs program. And we have
also a PhD in administration. These are the three
degrees that we have right now in the society. It's
a PhD in urban administration? No, PhD in
administration. It's only administration.
Planned administration. And we are sharing that
with business school. I see. You don't have a PhD
in? a planning-related topic. No, we don't have
direct PhD in planning-related topics. Inside
that PhD in administration, there is a major in
city and regional planning, which is relatively
small major, rather than they have something
above major as a primary or something. I don't
remember what's the name. But one inside that
Ph.D. program, basically getting Ph.D. in
administration, can have a major in city and
regional planning, which is not equivalent to
Ph.D. in planning at all. It would be more or less an
emphasis. It is like emphasis.
How long has the... city and regional planning
program been in existence? Do you know when it was
created? Those I'll need to go back to our, you
know, books and our things. I came here at 1979 and I
believe at that time the program was in existence
perhaps for I would say for six years then. I'm not
sure exactly when. Joel would be a better person to
know exact date because he was one of the people
that basically put the program together. He was
hard, I think, to do that. All right. How many
students... do you normally enroll
approximately every year?
You know that in planning programs, normally
these things go up and down. And especially in this
program, since my being here, we have been always
in different situations depending on what was
going on. Overall, up to a couple of years ago, we
were somewhere between 20 to 30 students going
back and forth. In the last two years, our
enrollment drastically has increased. Right now
we have quite drastically, of course I mean in
terms of our small program. We have about 40
students. I think we have about 44, 42, something
like that. And perhaps for next year, we're going
to be about 40 some. But after that, no one knows.
You know that planning programs overall, you're
losing students. So I would think that at the most,
we're going to stay in 40. Or perhaps we're going to
go back to 20-some that we were one time before.
Looking at your program here, what would you
characterize as its major emphasis? How do you
feel that it can be identified? What sort of
planning program do you have? I would approach
that in this way, that at the beginning when I was
here, we had a program which basically trained
generalized type of, generalist type of
planning. And we had that for several years, and
even though we were encouraging the students to
sort of specialize, both because of the structure
of the program and perhaps also because of the
expertise of the faculty. It seems to me it was
difficult to specialize at those years. Then a
couple of years ago we went through a major effort
to revise the program. And as revision, we changed
the number of units required. Basically, right
now, we are requiring 48 credit hours.
And as part of that, we try to bring the program out
of generalist approach and explicitly encourage
students to specialize. And according to
resources of our faculty, by that I mean the areas
that they are involved and they can teach, et
cetera, We came up with a scheme which is sort of
Chinese menu type scheme and people can mix and
match the courses and the areas but basically we
offer three major areas of specialization which
inside each one of those there are focus areas of
specialization. Those three areas are first land
related things. We call that land development
scheme. and inside of this there are land use
planning, urban design, real estate development
or whatever you can think that is related to
physical planning and especially land. It is
inside this one. The second one is sort of
socio-economic type of planning and again inside
of that there are different specializations such
as housing or policy oriented transportation
etc. And third one is more number crunching,
computer-oriented analysis, heavy
quantitative analysis type of specialization.
And then, of course, we allow that students can
even mix and match with these things. For example,
if someone going to land use planning may like to
have a good knowledge of computers, so they're
going to take a couple of the computer-related
ones and some of the hardcore of land use
development or whatever. But basically this is
all we have. I see. Do you have what? might be
regarded as a core curriculum of minimum courses
that everyone... Yes, we have inside this
program, we have a core area or core courses, which
I believe are about 41 hours. As I promised, I'm
going to give you the summary of the program,
basically. There are about 21 hours or 24 hours of
the core courses, which... About half. So it is 21.
This is a little less than that. A little less,
yeah. And inside that, we also have two project lab
or laboratory, which is normally required, but
some programs may not put inside the core areas.
They are put directly in core area. So if you reduce
that, so it would be six minus 21 would be 15 hour of
core courses, then two project labs. and then
every specialization area that one is selecting
to go in would be five courses or 15 hours required
two of those five courses are required which is
mandated what courses they are And three would be
elected on the basis of the sub-area of
specialization, that focus area of
sub-specialization that I said, which would be
selected by the advisor and the students design.
And then I believe we have about 12 hours of
electives, depending on if they are doing thesis
or exam or whatever. Because if they go thesis
route, they have to spend some of those for their
thesis. Otherwise, if they are doing
comprehensive exam, the whole 12 hours is open for
electives. The electives, we heavily encourage
the students to use those also for
specialization. So hopefully four courses there
and five courses there, so nine courses we try to
use for specialization, the students to
basically get some knowledge of the area that they
think they are specializing. Do you require an
internship? Yes, we require internship, but
students don't get credit for registering for
internship. That was one of the means that we
reduced our logs. We give them one credit hour. One
credit hour. That's not a bad idea. We never
thought of that. Otherwise, perhaps we would have
done it. There was a big debate about it, and it
varied substantially depending upon the
student's committee chairman in the past. And it
was so flexible that it created some problems
among the students, because some would say, well,
I worked all summer and I only got one credit hour,
and another worked six weeks and he or she got
three. And so we decided everybody should get one.
Yours is semester system or quarter? Semester.
Semester. We've always been semester. You're on
semester. Yeah, we are semester too. Okay.
Your general perception of planning education in
Texas, what role do you see UT Arlington's efforts
taking with respect to the statewide view of
planning education? I would admit that I am not
that much familiar with the other two programs,
your program and also us in program. I know overall
that these two programs are there and I know some of
the faculties like you and I have seen their
curriculum before but right now I don't really
know that what are the difference between the
programs. I would say our program in comparison to
some of the national programs that I know, is
perhaps a little more oriented toward practice of
planning than upon their type of theories or
philosophical discussions or something of that
nature. And I personally like it to be that way. I
always consider planning as a profession. I guess
all of us consider planning as a profession. And I
like to see that, like any professional schools,
we are training our students to come out as actual
planners and to use what they have learned at
schools. Of course, as you know, planning hasn't
been developed as much as, say, engineering or
civil engineering or something. So we are
attempting to do that, but we have limitations in
doing that. And of course, because of that,
perhaps, and also educational type of
philosophies, there would be always theoretical
courses such as planning theory or those type of
things around, and we have those. But I overall see
that our programs, in comparison to some of the
programs that I've seen up in North or in the West
Coast, is more geared toward actual applied
planning. And I think that's what we need in Texas,
in my view, because Nothing much has been done in
Texas, planning relatively new in comparison to
the rest of the nation in Texas. Therefore, we need
people to come out of these schools and go and apply
things. But on the other hand, one thinking that
way may be sort of misled to think that if we are
saying apply, we necessarily talk about applied
planning in city which normally end up to be land
use related those type of things of course that to
me is sort of core of planning on the other hand
there are lots of other aspects of planning that we
try also to bring them about and those would be
applied, maybe eventually end up as policy
analysis or something for a department or even a
private organization. But I meant mostly to have
some application to discussions that we are
having in class or whatever. There seems to be
almost an untapped resource for planners in
corporate planning. and corporate affairs and
what many of their job descriptions call for can be
termed planning. But they don't call it that
because they're not they're coming at it from a
different perspective. In fact, up to a year or a
year and a half ago, the growth was a big thing in
Texas, especially real estate growth was a big
thing here. We had lots of applicants that they
were coming here that their aim wasn't to go and
work in public agencies at all. They were planning
to come and get the degree and go to a private
sector, and mostly they wanted to go to real estate
development, either in business for themselves,
or they wanted to be hard first with the real estate
development firms and eventually go for
themselves also. Perhaps now it has been to reduce
those type of people, but I see real demand outside
the people. And some of these, incidentally, they
had degrees, MBA degrees even. business degrees,
and they realize that what they need they have to
learn in those type of environments. And that
perhaps is true in your program. I don't know if you
had similar experiences. Well, we did. And we
created a new degree, the MSLD, Master of Science
in Land Development. And it was the right program
at the wrong time. About the time it got started,
the bottom fell out of the construction industry.
so that enrollment has fallen off perceptibly
every semester. And it's a good program, but it
just simply consumed, I think, an inordinate
amount of time of our faculty and our resources at a
time when we should have been bolstering the MUP
degree. What's the MUP degree? The Master of Urban
Planning. Oh, OK. Yours is a Master of City and
Regional Planning? City and Regional Planning.
MCRP. MCRP. Yeah. So, let's see, you offer the PhD
and the dissertation, the MCRP, and what other
degree? Well, what we call it, ORBA, it is Urban and
Regional Affairs. Urban, what is it, a Bachelor's
or Master's? Master's. It's MA degree in Urban and
Regional Affairs. Basically, Urban Affairs
program. Uh-huh. Well, a lot of affairs are urban.
Yeah, but I guess rather than saying it's
basically an urban affair program, I should have
said that it basically is getting closer to public
administration side of the issues. I see. We may in
future try to get a public administration degree
or so. I don't know. But we don't have such a degree.
So this, I think, is some sort of substitute.
People who are going to work in the urban
environment, but not necessarily interested in
the planning side of it. I am not that familiar with
the program, so I can't give you more information.
But my understanding is that there is good
differences between that program and our
program. In your MCRP degree program, what is your
faculty-student ratio? Of course, since we said
the student number were changing very quickly
almost, I would think that the faculty-student
ratio also would change very quickly. Basically,
we have... I don't know, the faculty members are a
little loose here. Three people, 100%, I can see
that they're always involved in teaching and
everything of planning. Then in addition to
those, we have Bob Wagner, who also teach in
planning all the time. In addition to those, also,
as you know, he does that, what's that, the
newsletter for Texas planners. He's editor of
that, and recently you all given that Texas
planner thing to him, too. So he's another faculty
member always there. We have Paul Guizzo.
supposedly sort of half-and-half with us. We have
another faculty of that nature. I don't know if you
have met him or not. Jim Corneil. He is also
supposedly half-and-half with us. What's his
other half? The Orba and Ph.D. programs. These are
all people that I'm talking right now are in the
institute. Then we have Andrew Seidel. who is a
person with, I believe his bachelor's degree is
architecture, if I am right. But he has a master's
in city and regional planning from Harvard. And
then he has a PhD in planning from, I believe,
Michigan. So he is a planner, and he teaches
planning type of courses. And his situation with
us is sort of vague. Supposedly, he should be with
us. I mean, name-wise and teaching-wise, et
cetera. But he was hired before our move from
architecture to here by the Orbaugh program and
the PhD program. So officially, he was hired with
them. But right now that we are here, he's also with
us. So he's also editor of the Journal of
Architecture and Planning Research. So he is,
again, an our faculty member, in my mind, can be
easily 100% planning. But he happened to be at
least officially under other So we are dealing
with that. We are trying to bring him basically to
our program as much as we can. And he teaches
planning-related courses. He teaches urban
design courses. Urban design is one of his
specialty. And he teaches urban geography and
introduction to planning and those type of
things. But some of these courses before our move
to here has been part of their programs. So those
courses attract the students both from our
program and also from their programs. When you say
their, you're talking about... I am talking about
that urban affair program that time. So they had
those type of courses prior to movement of city and
regional planning out of architecture to here.
They had those courses. And it was hard to teach
those courses. That's why he was here. I see. the
structure is a little bit complex. Yeah, it is.
And, you know, we have also gone through a major
change in the last two, three years. As I said, the
university changed their attitude about the
professional schools. And we had another major
big program inside the institute. The institute,
for some reason, I don't know the detail, decided
that they don't want that program inside the
institute. That was criminal justice program.
and at least for now that has gone out of the
institute to other I believe it's in liberal arts
or somewhere so when they moved out then the that
caused when you are overall small organization
when a major part goes out the relationship
between others also gonna change and we are in that
mood of change now we are changing constantly and I
think we are opening up more to each other. I'm
seeing as a trend inside our organization that we
open up our courses to their students. They open up
their courses to us. Our faculty to teach also for
them, their faculty to teach for us. In fact, we
have had good faculty inside their faculty that
perfectly would have fit in my mind. I'm saying my
personal ideas. In my mind, some of their courses
would have been excellent for our students. Like,
for example, we had the cost-benefit course. I
think that's exactly a course we need. Then we have
there... By we have, I mean in those programs. We
have public finance courses, which are
traditionally being taught in planning
programs. And those are being taught in those two
programs. So we have lots of courses like that. And
then we have statistic courses that we teach here
that can go also to be taught there. And all those
type of things that we've got to work it out to
basically improve the quality for students. for
also the faculty to be able to be involved in all of
these.
Strangely enough, as I was telling you, I teach a
statistics course here in the planning program.
And as you know, my background and education has
been first in architecture. In fact, I have been a
practicing architect for 10, 15 years before even
starting my planning education. Where did you get
your degree in architecture? Back home. I got a
master's degree in architecture back in
University of Tehran. Did you study with Dr.
Mozayeni? No, Mozayeni came to teach there when I
was almost at the, you know, doing the final thesis
and all things. You might have known Tabibian.
Yeah, Tabibian was just two years ahead of me in the
architecture program. I see. Then I was also, when
I was practicing architects back in Iran,
Tabibian and I were both in a supposedly some sort
of doctorate program in planning that they had
there. And he was, again, a year or two ahead of me.
And he got a special scholarship from them. And he
went, I forgot, to Eastern Europe or somewhere. to
get a degree from there. I forgot where. He got some
sort of degree and came back and started to teach
there, I heard. I think he was in the United States,
too. Was he? I don't know. I've forgotten exactly.
So in any event... We have that in common, then,
because I was a Fulbright assignment to the
University of Tehran for the fall of 1978. Yeah,
you told me that it's such a bad year that all the
revolutions start. Yeah, bad timing. Bad timing.
But in my case, I never finalized that degree. In
fact, I don't believe that that degree program
stayed there, that PhD type of program that they
had. And I was basically, I was a little
dissatisfied with what I was learning, so I quit
that. I was practicing architecture until 1974
that I came here. I immigrated in 1974. I didn't
come to go to school here. I basically came as an
architect to work. And my wife basically pushed me
to go to planning school. I wanted to go to urban
design program in either UCLA or USC. Did you move
to California? Yeah, we moved to California. I had
a friend there at UCLA. And he had gone to an urban
design program there. I don't know urban design or
architecture, whatever, but they sort of
specialized in urban design. And my wife sort of
pushed me. She was also an architect from the
University of Tehran. She is an architect from the
University of Tehran. She wouldn't be allowed to
go to school right now. Yeah, right now, I don't
know. Is that true? In any event, we end up in
planning program. I was just telling you that I am
coming from heavy design background. I was
basically designer. Even in the architect
offices, I normally acted as a designer. I wasn't a
working drawing type of man. And then I got a little
fascination with the quantitative application
of planning. That's why I shifted my education
there. And when I came here, they basically hired
me to teach mostly quantitative courses. And I
started to teach statisticals. And I have my
beliefs that I think it is perhaps better if
someone can teach statistics and especially
other non-statistical quantitative methods. to
planning students if he himself is a planner and I
have my reasons and I don't want to take your time
going to all those details, but basically
statistics by itself is very dry and boring
material and if you go to statistician to teach
those things to you they're gonna go to such a
length of materials that that I would say 95% of the
things won't be things that you actually would
need if you become an applied planner. And I can say
that bravely because I have taught that course now
for eight, nine years. And from the beginning, I
started to copy the course that I had with my
teacher back when I was in the planning programs.
And that person even was semi-planner. what I
realized with these years of teaching that so many
materials are really excessive we don't need
those we don't need all those proofs we don't need
all those talking about so many details we only
need to know what's the concept and how that can be
applied i don't mean that my course by now is
perfect course i still you know revising and every
day i'm changing realizing more and more that what
really at least in our program our students are not
going to go mostly to PhD program or if they go they
have to take an R-statistic course. So basically
we are teaching these things to these students to
go outside and if ever they needed to apply
something of statistical nature to remember
those and to have some concepts what's the whole
thing about. And I think this view would change
what you are teaching to them. That's why I think
that would be better overall if a planner with
experience in planning, and especially to
experience a little in the physical side of it, to
teach them statistics. Of course, it would be
difficult to find such a rare combination, and I
guess I'm one of the rare ones. But I don't think
that students love my course. They don't like my
course either. Statistics is... Strange topic,
you know. Some people are good and they would like
it. Some people have difficulty of understanding
what is this whole thing about and what's the
application of it. Some students may think at the
end of any statistical course, so what? We know all
these techniques, what we can do with those,
especially students coming from architecture
school, et cetera, that they have learned to have
something, and they sit down and come up with a
product, which is a finished and meaningful
product. And I think it would be difficult to tell
them what they are, unless that you are also
understanding where they are coming from and what
they are saying to you. Just a view of the
statistics I talked about. But let me complete
that if we have time. Let's see how our tape is doing
here. This is the other course that we have in our
program. We call that method course. And that's
non-statistical, but mostly quantitative type
of planning-related methods. I really think that
that is more important than statistics to
planners. And it is good if someone, an actual
planner, teaches those courses rather than a
scientist or something. What sort of methods do
you include? In that one, I teach also that course.
I have about five, six, seven basic topics inside.
One is basically land use models. And I think the
importance of the land use models, which is mostly
mathematical models, is not really that they're
going to go and apply those models because it might
be difficult for them. But I think conceptually it
is very important that they know how
scientifically they can view the urban area and
analyze the structure of urban area and know
what's causing what.